Dear Rutgers University Community, Welcome back to a new semester. I hope you found time during the break for rest, reflection, and renewal. While the hardest days of winter are upon us, the warmth of spring will arrive before we know it. You return to a community that is brought together by our long-standing mission as a public university: to provide for the educational needs of New Jersey through our undergraduate, graduate, and continuing education programs; to conduct cutting-edge research and clinical care that contributes to the health, environmental, social, economic, and cultural well-being of the state, nation, and world; and to perform public service in support of the people of the state and their local, county, and state governments. All around us we see remarkable examples of how we meet our mission. At Rutgers Health and in New Brunswick, Newark, and Camden, our faculty are tackling urgent challenges from preventing infectious diseases to reducing carbon emissions to addressing the opioid crisis. Our students are competing for prestigious fellowships, volunteering in our host communities, and contributing to our groundbreaking research. Our Scarlet Knights football team won the Pinstripe Bowl. Our Rutgers–Newark and Rutgers–Camden students won the New Jersey Ballot Bowl. And I’ve asked a task force led by Rutgers–Camden’s Nyeema Watson and Eagleton’s Elizabeth Matto to recommend how we can harness the already strong spirit of civic engagement at Rutgers and make it grow. To excel in our mission as a community requires that we engage in genuine curiosity and commit ourselves to understanding one another—even around the most difficult and divisive topics. For our community to thrive, we must embrace our shared humanity, with all its messiness and contradictions. Over the course of the spring, we will host events to spark conversations affirming our commitment to equity and inclusion amid rising tensions. I hope you will join us as we grapple with navigating differing viewpoints and conflicting ideologies, against the backdrop of the challenging local, national, and global political environment. In the months ahead, I ask you to think about how we, as members of the Rutgers community, can preserve our freedoms, how we can embrace them with the awesome responsibility they require—to be respectful and openminded, to be intellectually honest and curious, and to be civil, decent, and understanding of one another. I hope that you will carry those reflections with you in your interactions with professors, staff members, students, colleagues, and classmates, and that, when conflict arises—as it inevitably will—you seek first to understand. I wish you a productive, peaceful, and truly rewarding semester. Sincerely, Jonathan Holloway President and University Professor
Members of the Rutgers Community: As the war in the Middle East continues, intense debates, protests, and counterprotests are taking place in communities across our country, including here at Rutgers. Emotions remain understandably raw, and as we watch this tragedy unfold thousands of miles away, we are feeling the impact here at home. Last night I attended a student vigil with our Muslim community. My heart is heavy. I have seen grief on so many of the faces of our Muslim, Palestinian, and Arab students, and I have seen grief on so many of the faces of our Jewish and Israeli students. Many in our community have told me they feel unheard and unsafe. Let me be clear: I have heard you and I am committed to your safety. The fact that our community has gathered at multiple vigils in the last week speaks to the depth of the sorrow we are experiencing and the urgent need for compassion and empathy. Every innocent life lost is a profound tragedy. In these challenging times, it is vital that we come together to support one another, to listen to each other’s experiences and perspectives, and to engage in dialogue that fosters understanding. We must stand against hate in all its forms, including Islamophobia and antisemitism, and strive to be a safe and supportive place for our students, faculty, and staff. I am confident that, together, we can create a more inclusive and supportive environment at Rutgers. Through a collective commitment to empathy and respect, we can overcome challenges and continue to thrive as a community that values and celebrates our differences. Here at Rutgers, we adhere to the principles of free speech and academic freedom. All members of our community—our faculty, students, alumni, and staff—are free to express their viewpoints in public forums as private citizens, including viewpoints that the University itself may not share. And our faculty have the right, in the discharge of their duties, to express their ideas and to challenge the ideas of others without fear of retribution. More than ever in this difficult time, let us reaffirm our commitment to our university community. Sincerely, Jonathan Holloway President and University Professor
Members of the Rutgers Community: On Monday, I posted a statement focused on the impact at Rutgers of the invasion of Israel by Hamas terrorists, as well as Israel’s military response. Members of our university community have been deeply affected, and I offered—and continue to offer—the university’s support. As I said in that statement, we are all experiencing this violence in our own personal, and sometimes profound, ways. Let me amplify that statement by writing to you directly. What Hamas did in brutally murdering, torturing, and holding hostage innocent Israeli victims of all ages was unconscionable and an act of terrorism. That Hamas has reportedly threatened to murder the hostages one by one, and show them on film, only reinforces their brutality and terrorism. Our hearts go out to the people of Israel. Having attended a student vigil organized by a wide range of campus Jewish organizations this week, I know firsthand that Rutgers’ Jewish community is suffering pain, anguish, and fear. My heart continues to share in that pain. That does not diminish my concern for members of the university community with family and friends in Gaza. I fervently hope for the sparing of innocent lives, the release of hostages, and a peaceful and just resolution to these terrible events as soon as possible. I want you to know that we are working with the Rutgers police, the New Jersey State Police, Student Affairs offices, and others in our university community to make sure our campuses are as safe as possible in light of the tensions these events have caused. These are deeply troubling times, and emotions are understandably raw as we witness these brutal attacks and the ongoing hostilities. While we can and will disagree on politics and policies, I ask that we be sensitive to one another in recognition of the challenges we are all facing. Sincerely, Jonathan Holloway President and University Professor
Members of the Rutgers Community, As you may already know, the Supreme Court of the United States today rendered a decision in two cases regarding the use of race as a consideration in college admissions. Those cases are Students for Fair Admissions v. University of North Carolina and Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard University. In today's decision, the Supreme Court held that Harvard's and UNC's consideration of race in admissions decisions violates the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment. In so doing, the Court rejected the role that race played in implementing the diversity-related goals asserted by Harvard and UNC. The Court did acknowledge, however, that colleges and universities may consider an applicant’s personal qualities and characteristics, even where such traits are informed by the applicant’s life experience as a member of a particular race. Please know that we will take the time to review our policies and practices to ensure they follow the law established by today’s decision. At the same time, Rutgers remains committed to our values as a university. Rutgers embodies the democratic possibilities of our country, opening its doors for people from the broadest range of backgrounds and recognizing that excellence can be found everywhere—and that will not change with this ruling. Our commitment to being a powerful engine of social mobility for students and their families will not change.  We continue to recognize the immense advantages that a richly diverse student body and faculty bring to the academic enterprise and the importance of providing affordable access to a world-class education for a diverse array of students. New Jersey’s diversity is its strength. We value and will continue to build on that strength as the State University of New Jersey. Sincerely, Jonathan Holloway President, Rutgers University
Dear Members of the Rutgers Community, I think that it is important that you receive regular, accurate updates with respect to the strike that has been called by three of our faculty unions. As you know, after several weeks of intense negotiations, mediators from the State were asked, beginning last Friday, to sit in on our contract negotiations with the AAUP-AFT, Rutgers Adjunct Faculty Union, and AAUP-BHSNJ. By Sunday afternoon it was clear that the outstanding issues were not moving toward resolution, and Governor Murphy summoned our negotiators and the negotiators from our faculty unions to meet in the Statehouse, along with representatives of his office, to come to an agreement. We are encouraged by Governor Murphy’s request and genuinely welcome his leadership. We are hopeful that we can quickly come to a resolution of the remaining outstanding issues. The Governor also asked me personally to delay taking legal action asking the courts to order strikers back to work. I agreed to the Governor’s important request while it appears that progress can be made. Obviously, if there is no movement towards an agreement, we will have no choice but to take legal action to assure the continued academic progress of our students and prevent irreparable harm. This is especially important for the thousands of students who are finishing their academic careers at Rutgers and are only a few weeks away from earning their degrees. Negotiations at the Statehouse began at about noon today and are continuing. In the meantime, our campuses are open and operating, including all academic buildings and libraries. We encourage students to continue attending their classes and doing their coursework, and we ask faculty and staff to continue doing their work as we carry out the business of the university. As a final but important note, we did receive reports today of classes being disrupted by protesters. In one instance, protesters actually entered a class where a critical exam was being conducted. While I respect the right of people to peacefully protest, there is no excuse for interfering with classes being taught by faculty who are choosing to continue with their jobs and meet their obligations to our students. I hope the union leadership will join me in urging their members to be respectful of our students and supportive of their academic progress. Sincerely, Jonathan Holloway President and University Professor
Members of the Rutgers Community, We are devastated by the news that three Michigan State University students were fatally shot, and five more students were critically injured, by a gunman on the MSU campus last night. Our hearts are with our fellow Big Ten institution, whose faculty and staff collaborate with our own and whose student-athletes compete alongside ours, and we grieve the loss of these innocent victims of another mass shooting, another act of senseless violence. Though I have been hesitant to communicate with you after incidents of violence or injustice or tragedy because they occur all too often, our close connection with Michigan State, and the similarities between our campus communities, compelled me to write to you today. Please know that we consider your safety and well-being our highest priority, and we do all we can to protect students, faculty, staff, and visitors on all our campuses and facilities. The tragic incidents of recent decades have meant that we must—and we do—prepare our public safety personnel to respond to active shooter situations and other threats to your safety and security, in conjunction with their partners in local and state law enforcement. We continue working to improve our preparedness every semester. You can find resources related to active shooter situations here, and look for a message later today from Executive Director of Public Safety Kenneth Cop with more detailed information. Also, in the wake of this terrifying incident, please remember that counseling is available on all our campuses if you need it. To be writing to you about these matters on Valentine’s Day—and on the fifth anniversary of the Parkland, Florida school shooting—brings me tremendous sadness. Such acts of horrible violence can leave us feeling not only fearful but also helpless. There is no doubt that we urgently need serious societal and statutory changes to address the heartbreaking cycle of gun violence in our country. As Michigan’s governor said, “We cannot accept living like this.” But what can you and I do today? I humbly ask that you take this heartbreaking occasion to consider counteracting violence with compassion. Consider going out of your way to help someone in need; give to disaster relief efforts, including those supporting earthquake victims; visit a lonely neighbor; help stock a food pantry; volunteer at a nursing home; give blood. I don’t pretend that your act of kindness will end violence, but it can make someone else’s life a little better and can remind you that there is light and grace at yet another moment of violence and loss. Sincerely, Jonathan Holloway President and University Professor
Dear Rutgers Students: I hope that you had a pleasant and recuperative spring break. During the past week, some students have reached out to express concerns about a potential faculty strike, so I am writing to update you on where we are with labor negotiations and to bring some comfort and clarity as you return to campus. I want to say from the start that few things are as important to me as assuring that Rutgers students have the encouragement, the academic support, and the tools they need to proceed unimpeded on the path to their degree. To that end, please know that we are in intensive negotiating sessions with our unions and are exchanging proposals on wages and other areas for both faculty and staff, always mindful of the potential financial impact on students and the university’s budgetary constraints. Yesterday, we made an offer on compensation to the faculty unions that exceeds the offer that the unions agreed to four years ago, during the last round of contract negotiations. We are making our offers and are responding to counter offers in good faith, and I believe there is real progress being made on reaching agreements on contracts that are fair, reasonable, and responsible. It is well-established that strikes by public employees are unlawful in New Jersey.  This activity includes work stoppages and work slowdowns, among other things. We hope that the courts would not have to be called upon to halt to an unlawful strike. No one wants that, nor does anyone want faculty or others to go without pay during an illegal strike. Most important, no one wants to disrupt the academic progress of more than 67,000 Rutgers students. I don’t believe it will come to that, but we have more work to do before we arrive at a solution that meets all parties' needs. A final note for our graduating students: our plans for commencements on all our campuses in May are unchanged. I am confident that the commencement speakers will be uplifting, and I know that the ceremonies celebrating your dedication, your families' sacrifices, and the support you have received from our faculty will be spectacular. I am glad to have you back on campus and look forward to finishing out this academic year in fine Rutgers fashion. Sincerely, Jonathan Holloway President and University Professor